VIKING BRUTALITY OFFICIAL RULEBOOK
Rules
1 General Conduct & Dispute Resolution
● 1.1 Eye protection is mandatory for participants, spectators & officials at the event site.
● 1.2 Ear protection is mandatory for participants, spectators & officials while on or near a
stage.
● 1.3 No participants or spectators shall consume or be under the influence of alcohol or nonprescription drugs at the public event site during the shooting event. Any participant found
to be impaired as a result of legitimate prescription drugs may be directed to stop shooting
and leave the event site.
● 1.4 Clothing with any offensive images or wording will not be worn or displayed while at the
event site.
● 1.5 Participants may be subject to event disqualification for safety or conduct violations.
Disqualification will result in complete disqualification from the event, and the participant will
not be allowed to continue nor be eligible for prizes.
● 1.6 Participants and spectators are expected to conduct themselves in a courteous and
sportsman-like manner at all times. Any person who violates this rule may be ejected from
the event site at the Range Master’s discretion. A participant shall be disqualified for
unsportsmanlike conduct, including (but not limited to) cheating, making threats, assault,
disruptive or distracting behavior, and willful disregard of Event Official instructions.
● 1.7 All disqualifications and reshoots are subject to approval by the Range Master.
● 1.8 Participants must compete for score according to the published match and squading
schedule.
● 1.8.1 A participant who is not present at the scheduled time and date for a stage may not
attempt that stage without the written approval of the Range Master, and the provisions of
rule 6.1.11 will apply.
● 1.8.2 The challenge of practical shooting includes adapting to prevailing conditions.
Participants will not be permitted to defer due to lighting or weather conditions, except when
the Range Master determines that a stage attempt would (i) start outside the published
hours for sun rise to-sunset, or (ii) put participant or Event Official safety in immediate
jeopardy.
● 1.9 Any aspect not expressly covered in this document will be resolved with a ruling by the
Match Director in consultation with the Range Master as they deem appropriate. Any ruling
by the Match Director will be final, and will serve as a precedent for the duration of the
event.
2 Safety
● 2.1 All events will be run on cold ranges.
● 2.1.1 Participants’ firearms must remain unloaded at the event site except under the
direction and immediate supervision of an Event Official.
● 2.2 Firearms may only be handled and/or displayed in a designated safety area.
● 2.2.1 Safety areas will be clearly marked with signs.
● 2.2.2 No firearm may be loaded in a safety area.
● 2.2.3 No ammunition (including dummy ammunition, snap caps or ammunition feeding
devices) may be handled in a safety area.
● 2.3 Firearms may be transported to, from and between stages only in the following
conditions:
● 2.3.1 Handguns must be cased or holstered, de-cocked and with the magazine removed.
● 2.3.2 Rifles must be cased, or secured muzzle up or down in a stable gun cart/caddy, or
carried with the muzzle up or down. The chamber must be empty and detachable magazine
removed. The use of high-visibility open bolt indicator devices (chamber flags) is mandatory
as a courtesy to other event participants. When moving between stages, rifles must be in
cases or bags, or carried with the muzzle pointed in a safe direction and with a chamber
flag insterted.
● 2.4 A participant who commits a safety violation will be stopped by an Event Official as soon
as possible, and shall be disqualified. Examples of safety violations include:
● 2.4.1 An accidental discharge, defined as follows:
● 2.4.1.1 A shot, which travels over a backstop, a berm or in any other direction specified in
the stage briefing as being unsafe. Note that a participant who legitimately fires a shot at a
target, which then travels in an unsafe direction, will not be disqualified.
● 2.4.1.2 A shot which strikes the ground within 10 feet of the participant, except when
shooting at a target closer than 10 feet. Also, a shot which strikes a prop where the bullet is
deflected or does not continue to strike the ground, if the Event Official determines that the
bullet would have struck the ground within 10 feet of the participant had it not been
deflected or stopped by the prop.
● 2.4.1.3 A shot which occurs while loading, preloading, reloading or unloading a firearm.
● 2.4.1.4 A shot which occurs during remedial action in the case of a malfunction.
● 2.4.1.5 A shot which occurs while transferring a firearm between hands or shoulders.
● 2.4.1.6 A shot which occurs during movement, except while actually shooting at targets.
● 2.4.2 Unsafe gun handling, including (but not limited to):
● 2.4.2.1 Handling a firearm at any time except when in a designated safety area, or when
under the supervision of, and in response to a direct command issued by, an Event Official.
This does not apply to the carrying of rifles to safety areas or rifle racks.
● 2.4.2.2 If at any time during the course of fire, a participant allows the muzzle of his firearm
to point rearwards (i.e. further than 90 degrees from the median intercept of the backstop,
or in the case of no backstop, allows the muzzle to point up-range), whether the firearm is
loaded or not.
● 2.4.2.3 If at any time during the course of fire, or while loading, reloading or unloading, a
participant drops his firearm or causes it to fall, whether the firearm is loaded or not.
● 2.4.2.4 Allowing the muzzle to point at any part of the participant’s body during a course of
fire (except for sweeping of the lower extremities while drawing or re-holstering a handgun,
provided that the participant’s fingers are clearly outside the trigger guard). During certain 
stages, the rifle might start empty or be emptied under range officer supervision, after which
it is allowed to be carried e.g. on a sling on the back, muzzle pointing up or down. In this
case, the handling sectors are defined in detail in the stage description.
● 2.4.2.5 While facing downrange, allowing the muzzle of a loaded handgun to point up-range
beyond a radius of 3 feet from the participant’s feet while drawing or re-holstering.
● 2.4.2.6 Having more than one handgun and one rifle at any point in time during a course of
fire (except for stage guns).
● 2.4.2.7 Failure to keep the finger outside the trigger guard while clearing a malfunction
where the participant clearly moves the firearm away from aiming at targets.
● 2.4.2.8 Failure to keep the finger outside the trigger guard during loading, reloading, or
unloading (except when de-cocking a handgun).
● 2.4.2.9 Failure to keep the finger outside the trigger guard during movement (except when
engaging a target).
● 2.4.2.10 Holstering a loaded single-action self-loading handgun with the safety not applied,
or a double-action handgun with the hammer cocked and the safety not applied, or a
revolver with the hammer cocked.
● 2.4.2.11 Handling live or dummy ammunition, loaded magazines or loaded speed loading
devices in a Safety Area.
● 2.4.2.12 Having a loaded firearm other than when specifically ordered to by an Event
Official.
● 2.4.2.13 Retrieving a dropped firearm. Dropped firearms must always be retrieved by an
Event Official who will, after checking and/or clearing the firearm, place it directly into the
participant’s gun case, gun bag or holster.
● 2.4.2.14 Drawing a handgun while facing up-range or while prone.
● 2.4.2.15 Firing a shot at a metal target from a distance of less than 8 m / 26 feet with a
handgun or 50 m / 55 yards with a rifle. The distance is measured from the face of the
target to the nearest part of the participant’s body in contact with the ground.
● 2.4.3 Possession of any prohibited ammunition as defined in rule 3.3.
● 2.4.4 Unsafe abandonment of any firearm. Firearms may only be abandoned as stipulated
in the stage briefing and in one of the following safe conditions:
● 2.4.4.1 Rifle loaded with safety/selector fully in the "safe" position. Handgun in the condition
prescribed in rules 4.4.1.1 - 4.4.1.4. Muzzle pointed in the designated safe direction (e.g.
pointing down into the receptacle).
● 2.4.4.2 Completely unloaded (no live ammunition anywhere inside the firearm). Muzzle
pointed in the designated safe direction (e.g. pointing down into the receptacle).
● 2.4.5 Unloading any firearm in an unsafe manner.
● 2.4.6 Firing a shot while not legitimately engaging a target.
● 2.4.7 Pointing a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, in any direction deemed by Event
Officials to be unsafe.
3 Ammunition
● 3.1 Handgun ammunition shall be caliber 7.62x25 (30 Tokarev) or larger.
● 3.2 Rifle ammunition shall be centerfire, minimum caliber 5.45mm, maximum caliber
12.7mm, unless otherwise stipulated in equipment division rules.
● 3.3 Ammunition containing tracer, incendiary, explosive, armor piercing, bare steel jacket or
steel/tungsten/penetrator core projectiles is unsafe and prohibited. Bimetal projectiles (lead
core with mild steel jacket covered in copper) may be permitted at Match Director
discretion. No belted magnums or marking ammunition.
4 Firearms
● 4.1 All firearms used by participants must be serviceable and safe. Event Officials may
inspect a participant’s firearms at any time to check they are functioning safely. If any
firearm is declared unserviceable or unsafe by an Event Official, it must be withdrawn from
the event until it is repaired to the satisfaction of the Range Master.
● 4.2 Participants must use the same firearms (handgun and rifle) for the entire event.
● 4.3 If a participant\'s firearm becomes unserviceable, that participant may repair their
firearm with directly equivalent replacement parts. If replacement parts result in a significant
change to the firearm configuration, then the repair must be approved by the Range Master.
● 4.4 Unless otherwise stipulated in the stage briefing, the participant’s equipment will start
the stage in the following conditions:
● 4.4.1 Handgun loaded to division start capacity and holstered as follows:
● 4.4.1.1 Single-action auto must have a manual safety catch fully set to the "safe" position.
● 4.4.1.2 Double-action auto must be de-cocked.
● 4.4.1.3 Safe action pistols must have all safety systems in place and functional.
● 4.4.1.4 Revolver must have the hammer down.
● 4.4.2 Rifle loaded to division start capacity and held in the low ready position (i.e. oriented
with sights uppermost, butt stock in strong-side shoulder, hands in normal firing hold with
finger outside trigger guard, muzzle at belt level), safety catch set to the "safe" position.
● 4.4.3 The participant may not touch or hold any firearm loading device or ammunition after
the "Standby" command and before the start signal (except for unavoidable touching with
the lower arms).
● 4.4.4 All equipment must start the stage secured on the participant’s person or firearms (i.e.
equipment may not be otherwise pre-positioned on the stage). Belts, holsters, ammunition
carriers and other equipment worn or carried by the participant may be changed,
repositioned or reconfigured between stages according to the rules and restrictions of the
divisions.
5 Equipment Divisions
● 5.1 Participants will declare one equipment division at the beginning of the event.
● 5.1.1 Equipment divisions are: IRONS, OPEN, and ARMORED ("TST")
● 5.1.2 Failure to meet all of the equipment and ammunition requirements for the declared
division shall result in the participant being placed into OPEN division. If the requirements
of OPEN division are not met, the participant’s scores will be excluded from the final event
results.
● SPECIAL NOTE 1: SERPA and "Race" holsters are expressly forbidden.
6 Scoring & Penalties
● 6.1 Stage time will be based on time to complete the stage plus applicable penalties.
● 6.1.1 Each stage will have a written stage briefing:
● 6.1.1.1 The stage briefing will stipulate the number and type of targets, the manner in which
they must be engaged, and the hits required to neutralize them.
● 6.1.1.2 The stage briefing will stipulate a time limit ("par time") for completing the stage.
● 6.1.1.3 The participant must complete the stage as stipulated within the time limit. Targets
may not be intentionally left un-hit – the participant must continue to engage the targets
until they run out of ammunition or time. If a participant exceeds the time limit, they will be
stopped by an Event Official and the stage will be scored as shot with the scored time at
PAR time and all applicable miss penalties. Event Officials may prompt the participant on
engagement of targets, and this will not be deemed to be interference.
● 6.1.2 Paper "shoot" targets must be neutralized:
● 6.1.2.1 Only holes made by bullets will count for score/penalty. Evidence that the bullet
made the hole must be present on the target (i.e. crown or grease ring/mark). Holes made
by shrapnel, fragments or flying debris will not count for score/penalty. A perfect "Keyhole"
round will count for score.
● 6.1.2.2 Paper targets require a minimum of hits detailed in the stage description to an area
in the target (also detailed in the stage description).
● 6.1.3 Knock-down targets (e.g. Pepper Poppers) must fall to be neutralized, or per RO
discretion.
● 6.1.4 Reactive/ringing targets must react/ring as prescribed in the stage briefing (Event
Officials will call hits).
● 6.1.5 Frangible targets (e.g. clay pigeons) must break by gunfire to score. A target with a
significant piece visibly detached is considered "broken".
● 6.1.6 Scoring a hit on each designated "No Shoot" target will incur a penalty. These will not
be cumulative, there is one penalty for a hit "No Shoot" regardless of how many hits have
struck that particular target.
● 6.1.7 Penalties may be applied at the Range Master’s discretion if a participant fails to
comply with prescribed stage procedures.
● 6.1.8 The stage briefing may stipulate a shooting area sequence. During such a stage,
once a participant begins shooting from a shooting area, they may not return to any
previous shooting area (violation will incur penalties per rule 6.1.7 on a per-shot basis).
● 6.1.9 Additional penalties may be applied as stipulated in the stage briefing.
● 6.1.10 Stage Not Fired (SNF) penalty is 5000 seconds per stage not fired.
● 6.1.11 A participant who, by negligent or willful act, causes damage to range equipment or
targets will be required to pay for repair thereof.
● 6.1.12 Some stages may have scoring requirements that deviate from the ones specified
here and that will be clearly stated during in the stage description. It is up to the contestant
to understand the scoring requirements per stage.
● 6.1.13 Penalties at this match are usually +60 seconds per instance - no shoots, nonneutralized targets, etc. The stage description may indicate penalties of different lengths.
6.2 Match Time
● 6.2.1 Each participant’s Stage Times with bonuses and penalties will be totaled to produce
a Match Time.
● 6.2.2 Match Times for all participants will be ranked in order, lowest to highest, to determine
match placement.
● 6.2.3 The participant with the lowest Match Time wins.
Insurance and release of liability
● Organizing parties have not insured any of the participants. All participants are required to
have an adequate insurance policy in place.
● Every participant will be required to sign the Release of Liability. You can find the release
form below, and it will also be available at the registration:
● All participants are bound to follow match safety rules and range officers during the match.
If the participant violates the safety rules or range officer commands intentionally or by
negligence, the match organizer has the right to remove the participant from the match
without refunding the entry fee.
● The organizing party will not carry any liability of intentional or negligence incidents caused
by participants. Prior to entering the match, the participant needs to be sure that they have
needed mental and physical capabilities to perform match in a safe manner. Participants
commit to using appropriate safety gear during the match. The organizing party will not
carry any liability of damages due to the faulty or inadequate safety equipment.
● Participants are required to have a suitable insurance policy covering shooting events. The
organizing party has not insured participants.
● Participants are responsible for their own gear, guns, and equipment. The organizing party
will not carry any liability of possible damages for gear, guns, and equipment during the
match.